<!-- Chapter 5: Bias-Free Language Guidelines -->
<!-- Lines 2705-2933 from APA7manual.md -->

# **BIAS-FREE LANGUAGE GUIDELINES**

Authors must strive to use language that is free of bias, meaning the implied or irrelevant evaluation of the group or groups they are writing about. As an organization, APA is committed to both the advancement of science and the fair treatment of individuals and groups. These principles require that authors and students who use APA Style avoid perpetuating demeaning attitudes in their writing. It is unacceptable to use constructions that might imply prejudicial beliefs or perpetuate biased assumptions against persons on the basis of age, disability, gender, participation in research, racial or ethnic identity, sexual orientation, socioeconomic status, or some combination of these or other personal factors (e.g., marital status, immigration status, religion). Instead, authors should use affirming and inclusive language.

Long-standing cultural practice can exert a powerful influence over even the most conscientious writer. Just as you have learned to check what you write for spelling, grammar, and wordiness, practice rereading your work for preconceptions about groups of people. Ask people from the groups about which you are writing to read and comment on your material or consult selfadvocacy groups to determine appropriate terminology. If you work directly with participants, ask them what terms they use to describe themselves. Language changes over time, and it is important to use the terms that individuals and/or communities use to describe themselves, their experiences, and their practices.

Some attempts to follow the guidelines in this chapter may result in wordiness or clumsy prose. As always, good judgment is required—these are not rigid rules. If your writing reflects respect for your participants and your readers, and if you write with appropriate specificity and precision, you contribute to the goal of accurate, unbiased communication. This chapter contains general guidelines for writing without bias that apply across a range of issues and additional guidelines that address specific topics, including age, disability, gender, participation in research, race and ethnicity, sexual orientation, socioeconomic status, and intersectionality. Additional examples of bias-free language can be found on the APA Style website ([https://apastyle.apa.org](https://apastyle.apa.org/)).

### **General Guidelines for Reducing Bias**

### **5.1 Describe at the Appropriate Level of Specificity**

Precision is essential in scholarly writing; when you refer to a person or persons, choose words that are accurate, clear, and free from bias or prejudicial connotations. Bias, like inaccurate or unclear language, can be a form of imprecision. For example, using "man" to refer to all human beings is not as accurate or inclusive as using the terms "individuals," "people," or "persons."

**Focus on Relevant Characteristics.** Be mindful to describe only relevant characteristics. Although it is possible to describe a person's age, disability, gender identity, participation in research, racial and ethnic identity, sexual orientation, socioeconomic status, or other characteristic without bias, it is not always necessary to include all of this information in your report (for a more detailed discussion of participant characteristics to report in quantitative and qualitative studies, refer to [Sections](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-003.xhtml#3-6) 3.6 and [3.14,](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-003.xhtml#3-14) respectively). For example, you would be unlikely to mention participants' sexual orientation in a study of cognition because sexual orientation is not relevant to cognition; however, you would likely mention participants' gender in a study of stereotype threat because gender is relevant to the examination of stereotype threat. Furthermore, there may be multiple relevant characteristics to discuss; when this is the case, address the ways in which the characteristics intersect, as appropriate (see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-10) 5.10).

**Acknowledge Relevant Differences That Do Exist.** Part of writing without bias is not only recognizing that differences should be mentioned only when relevant but also acknowledging relevant differences when they do exist. Evaluate the meaning of the word "difference" carefully in relation to the target population, not the dominant group. For example, a researcher who wants to generalize the study results to people overall, or students overall, and so forth, should assess and report whether the sample studied is different from the target population and, if so, describe how it is different.

**Be Appropriately Specific.** Once you have determined which characteristics to describe, choose terms that are appropriately specific, which will depend on the research question and the present state of knowledge in the field. Do not mention characteristics gratuitously; however, when in doubt, be more specific rather than less because it is easier to aggregate data than to disaggregate them. Consider the appropriate level of specificity early in the research process—such as when designing the study—because it may not be possible to gather more data once the study is underway or finished. Using specific terms improves readers' ability to understand the generalizability of your findings and other researchers' ability to use your data in a metaanalysis or replication.

**Examples of Specificity by Topic.** Next, we present examples of specific language for the topics covered in these bias-free language guidelines; again, the proper choice will depend on the situation, and these examples represent just some of the possible options.

- When writing about age, exact ages or age ranges (e.g., 15–18 years old, 65–80 years old) are more specific than broad categories (e.g., under 18 years old, over 65 years old; see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-3) 5.3). Also include the age mean and median in addition to the range of ages to increase the specificity of the reporting.
- When writing about disability, names of conditions (e.g., Alzheimer's disease) are more specific than categories of conditions (e.g., types of dementia) or general references such as "people with disabilities" (see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-4) 5.4).
- When writing about gender identity, descriptors with modifiers (e.g., cisgender women, transgender women) are more specific than descriptors without modifiers (e.g., women) or general nongendered terms (e.g., people, individuals; see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-5) 5.5 for how to differentiate between gender and sex).
- When writing about people who took part in research, terms that indicate the context of the research (e.g., patients, participants, clients) are more specific than general terms (e.g., people, [children,](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-6) women; see Section 5.6).

- When writing about racial or ethnic groups, the nation or region of origin (e.g., Chinese Americans, Mexican Americans) is more specific than a generalized origin (e.g., Asian Americans, Latin [Americans;](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-7) see Section 5.7).
- When writing about sexual orientation, the names of people's orientations (e.g., lesbians, gay men, bisexual people, straight people) are more specific than broad group labels (e.g., gay; see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-8) 5.8).
- When writing about socioeconomic status, income ranges or specific designations (e.g., below the federal poverty threshold for a family of four) are more specific than general labels (e.g., low [income;](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-9) see Section 5.9).

### **5.2 Be Sensitive to Labels**

Respect the language people use to describe themselves; that is, call people what they call themselves. Accept that language changes with time and that individuals within groups sometimes disagree about the designations they use. Make an effort to determine what is appropriate for your study or paper, particularly when these designations are debated within groups. You may need to ask your participants which designations they use and/or consult selfadvocacy groups that represent these communities to research the issue if you are not working directly with participants. However, note that some individuals may use slurs or stigmatizing language to refer to themselves; researchers should use extreme caution before repeating this language because doing so can propagate that stigma (see [Sections](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-3) 5.3–[5.4](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-4) for more on the use of stigmatizing language with regard to age and disability, respectively).

**Acknowledge People's Humanity.** Choose labels with sensitivity, ensuring that the individuality and humanity of people are respected. Avoid using adjectives as nouns to label people (e.g., "the gays," "the poor") or labels that equate people with their condition (e.g., "amnesiacs," "schizophrenics," "the learning disabled," "drug users"). Instead, use adjectival forms (e.g., gay men, older adults) or nouns with descriptive phrases (e.g., people living in poverty, people with learning disabilities, people who use drugs). Some groups (e.g., the Deaf) have chosen to use a capitalized label to identify and

promote a sense of unity and community (Solomon, 2012); use the label that the community uses, even when that label is adjectival (note, however, that not everyone who has hearing loss identifies as Deaf). In particular, the use of labels where disability is concerned is evolving, and people may disagree about the preferred approach. When writing about disability, person-first language (e.g., "a person with paraplegia" rather than "a paraplegic"), identity-first language (e.g., "an autistic person" rather than "a person with autism"), or both may be acceptable depending on the group you are writing about (see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-4) 5.4).

**Provide Operational Definitions and Labels.** If you provide operational definitions of groups early in your paper (e.g., "participants scoring a minimum of X on the Y scale constituted the high verbal group, and those scoring below X constituted the low verbal group"), the best practice is to describe participants thereafter in terms of the measures used to classify them (e.g., "the contrast for the high verbal group was statistically significant"), provided the terms are not inappropriate. A pejorative label should not be used in any form. Abbreviations or series labels for groups usually sacrifice clarity and may be problematic: "LDs" or "LD group" to describe people with specific learning difficulties is problematic; "HVAs" for "high verbal ability group" is difficult to decipher. "Group A" is not problematic, but it is also not descriptive. Instead, ensure that operational group labels are clear and appropriate (e.g., "group with dysgraphia").

**Avoid False Hierarchies.** Compare groups with care. Bias occurs when authors use one group (often their own group) as the standard against which others are judged (e.g., using citizens of the United States as the standard without specifying why that group was chosen). For example, usage of "normal" may prompt readers to make the comparison with "abnormal," thus stigmatizing individuals with differences. Likewise, contrasting lesbians with "the general public" or "normal women" portrays lesbians as marginal to society. More appropriate comparison groups for lesbians might be straight individuals, straight women, or gay men. Use parallel designations for groups, especially when presenting racial and ethnic [information](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-7) (see Section 5.7).

Be aware that the order of social group presentation may imply that the first-mentioned group is the norm or standard and that later-mentioned groups are abnormal or deviant. Thus, the phrases "men and women" and "White Americans and racial minorities" subtly reflect the perceived dominance of men and White people over other groups (furthermore, listing specific racial minority groups is preferable to writing about racial minorities in general; see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-7) 5.7). Similarly, when presenting group data, placing socially dominant groups such as men and White people on the left side of a graph or at the top of a table may also imply that these groups are the universal standard (Hegarty & Buechel, 2006). When referring to multiple groups, thoughtfully consider the order in which to present them. Do not put groups in order of social dominance by default; instead, consider options such as alphabetical order or sample size order. For ease of comprehension, list groups in the same order consistently throughout a paper.

### **Reducing Bias by Topic**

### **5.3 Age**

Age should be reported as part of the description of participants in the Method section. Be specific in providing age ranges, means, and medians (see also [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-1) 5.1). Avoid open-ended definitions such as "under 18 years" or "over 65 years," unless referring, for instance, to broad research study eligibility criteria.

**Terms for Different Age Groups.** Different terms are used for individuals of different ages, and these terms are often gendered (see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-5) 5.5). Use the terms individuals use to self-describe, whether these are binary gender categories of boy–girl or man–woman or descriptive and possibly nonbinary categories of transgender, genderqueer, agender, or gender-fluid.

- For an individual of any age, appropriate terms are "person," "individual," and so on. In general, avoid using "males" and "females" as nouns; instead use "men" and "women" or other age-appropriate words (see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-5) 5.5). "Males" and "females" are appropriate when groups include individuals with a broad age range (e.g., "males" to describe a group that includes both boys and men).
- For an individual aged 12 years and younger, appropriate terms are "infant" (for a very young child), "child," "girl," "boy," "transgender girl," "transgender boy," "gender-fluid child," and so on.
- For an individual aged 13 to 17 years, appropriate terms are "adolescent," "young person," "youth," "young woman," "young man," "female adolescent," "male adolescent," "agender adolescent," and so on.
- For an individual aged 18 years and older, appropriate terms are "adult," "woman," "man," "transgender man," "trans man," "transgender woman," "trans woman," "genderqueer adult," "cisgender adult," and so on.

**Terms for Older Adults.** Older adults are a subgroup of adults, and the age groups of older adults may be described with adjectives. On first reference to

a group of older people, be as specific as possible by including the age range, average age, and median age, when available. Terms such as "older persons," "older people," "older adults," "older patients," "older individuals," "persons 65 years and older," and "the older population" are preferred. Avoid using terms such as "seniors," "elderly," "the aged," "aging dependents," and similar "othering" terms because they connote a stereotype and suggest that members of the group are not part of society but rather a group apart (see Lundebjerg et al., 2017; Sweetland et al., 2017). Do not use these stigmatizing terms in your research even if your participants use them to refer to themselves (see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-4) 5.4 for similar guidance regarding disability). Likewise, avoid negativistic and fatalistic attitudes toward aging, such as age as being an obstacle to overcome (Lindland et al., 2015). Do not use "senile"; it is an outdated term with no agreed-upon meaning. Use "dementia" instead of "senility"; specify the type of dementia when known (e.g., dementia due to Alzheimer's disease). Be sure your language conveys that aging is a normal part of the human experience and is separate from disease and disorder.

Gerontologists may use combination terms for older age groups (e.g., "young-old," "old-old," "oldest old"); provide the specific ages of these groups when introducing them in your paper, and use the group names only as adjectives, not as nouns (i.e., refer to "young-old individuals," not to "the young-old"). When contrasting older adults with adults of other ages, describe that other age group specifically (e.g., young adults vs. older adults, middle-aged adults vs. older adults). You can use decade-specific descriptors if desired (e.g., octogenarian, centenarian). Generational descriptors such as "baby boomers," "Gen X," "millennials," "centennials," "Gen Z," and so on should be used only when discussing studies related to the topic of generations. For more information on writing about age, see "Guidelines for the Evaluation of Dementia and Age-Related Cognitive Change" (APA, 2012c) and "Guidelines for Psychological Practice With Older Adults" (APA, 2014).

### **5.4 Disability**

Disability is a broad term that is defined in both legal and scientific ways and encompasses physical, psychological, intellectual, and socioemotional impairments (World Health Organization, 2001, 2011). The members of

some groups of people with disabilities—effectively subcultures within the larger culture of disability—have particular ways of referring to themselves that they would prefer others to adopt. When you use the disability language choices made by groups of disabled individuals, you honor their preferences. For example, some Deaf individuals culturally prefer to be called "Deaf" (capitalized) rather than "people with hearing loss" or "people who are deaf" (Dunn & Andrews, 2015). Likewise, use the term "hard of hearing" rather than "hearing-impaired." Honoring the preference of the group is not only a sign of professional awareness and respect for any disability group but also a way to offer solidarity.

The language to use where disability is concerned is evolving. The overall principle for using disability language is to maintain the integrity (worth and dignity) of all individuals as human beings. Authors who write about disability are encouraged to use terms and descriptions that both honor and explain person-first and identity-first perspectives. Language should be selected with the understanding that the expressed preference of people with disabilities regarding identification supersedes matters of style.

**Person-First Language.** In person-first language, the person is emphasized, not the individual's disabling or chronic condition (e.g., use "a person with paraplegia" and "a youth with epilepsy" rather than "a paraplegic" or "an epileptic"). This principle applies to groups of people as well (e.g., use "people with substance use disorders" or "people with intellectual disabilities" rather than "substance abusers" or "the mentally retarded"; University of Kansas, Research and Training Center on Independent Living, 2013).

**Identity-First Language.** In identity-first language, the disability becomes the focus, which allows the individual to claim the disability and choose their identity rather than permitting others (e.g., authors, educators, researchers) to name it or to select terms with negative implications (Brown, 2011/n.d.; Brueggemann, 2013; Dunn & Andrews, 2015). Identity-first language is often used as an expression of cultural pride and a reclamation of a disability that once conferred a negative identity. This type of language allows for constructions such as "blind person," "autistic person," and "amputee,"

whereas in person-first language, the constructions would be "person who is blind," "person with autism," and "person with an amputation," respectively.

**Choosing Between Person-First and Identity-First Language.** Both person-first and identity-first approaches to language are designed to respect disabled persons; both are fine choices overall. It is permissible to use either approach or to mix person-first and identity-first language unless or until you know that a group clearly prefers one approach, in which case, you should use the preferred approach (Dunn & Andrews, n.d.). Mixing this language may help you avoid cumbersome repetition of "person with . . ." and is also a means to change how authors and readers regard disability and people within particular disability communities. Indeed, the level of disability identity integration can be an effective way to decipher the language that is preferred by the persons about whom you are writing. Those who embrace their disability as part of their cultural and/or personal identity are more likely to prefer identity-first language (Dunn & Andrews, 2015). If you are unsure of which approach to use, seek guidance from self-advocacy groups or other stakeholders specific to a group of people (see, e.g., Brown, 2011/n.d.). If you are working with participants directly, use the language they use to describe themselves.

**Relevance of Mentioning a Disability.** The nature of a disability should be indicated when it is relevant. For example, if a sample included people with spinal cord injuries and people with autism—two different groups with disabilities—then it makes sense to mention the presence of the particular disabilities. Within each group, there may be additional heterogeneity that should, under some circumstances, be articulated (e.g., different levels of spinal cord injury, different symptom severities of autism spectrum disorder).

**Negative and Condescending Terminology.** Avoid language that uses pictorial metaphors or negativistic terms that imply restriction (e.g., "wheelchair bound" or "confined to a wheelchair"; use the term "wheelchair user" instead) and that uses excessive and negative labels (e.g., "AIDS victim," "brain damaged"; use the terms "person with AIDS" or "person with a traumatic brain injury" instead). Avoid terms that can be regarded as slurs (e.g., "cripple," "invalid," "nuts," "alcoholic," "meth addict"); use terms like

"person with a physical disability," "person with a mental illness," "person with alcohol use disorder," or "person with substance use disorder" instead, or be more specific (e.g., "person with schizophrenia"). Labels such as "high functioning" or "low functioning" are both problematic and ineffective in describing the nuances of an individual's experience with a developmental and/or intellectual disability; instead, specify the individual's strengths and weaknesses. As with other diverse groups, insiders in disability culture may use negative and condescending terms with one another; it is not appropriate for an outsider (nondisabled person) to use these terms.

Avoid euphemisms that are condescending when describing individuals with disabilities (e.g., "special needs," "physically challenged," "handicapable"). Many people with disabilities consider these terms patronizing and inappropriate. When writing about populations or participants with disabilities, emphasize both capabilities and concerns to avoid reducing them to a "bundle of deficiencies" (Rappaport, 1977). Refer to individuals with disabilities as "patients" (or "clients") within the context of a health care setting (see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-6) 5.6).

### **5.5 Gender**

Gender offers an added layer of specificity when interpreting patterns or phenomena of human behavior. However, the terms related to gender and sex are often conflated, making precision essential to writing about gender and/or sex without bias. The language related to gender identity and sexual orientation has also evolved rapidly, and it is important to use the terms people use to describe themselves (Singh, 2017; for how to determine appropriate terms, see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-2) 5.2; for a list of terms and definitions, see APA, n.d.-a).

**Gender Versus Sex.** Gender refers to the attitudes, feelings, and behaviors that a given culture associates with a person's biological sex (APA, 2012b). Gender is a social construct and a social identity. Use the term "gender" when referring to people as social groups. For example, when reporting the genders of participants in the Method section, write something like this: "Approximately 60% of participants identified as cisgender women, 35% as cisgender men, 3% as transgender women, 1% as transgender men, and 1%

as nonbinary." Sex refers to biological sex assignment; use the term "sex" when the biological distinction of sex assignment (e.g., sex assigned at birth) is predominant. Using "gender" instead of "sex" also avoids ambiguity over whether "sex" means "sexual behavior." In some cases, there may not be a clear distinction between biological and acculturative factors, so a discussion of both sex and gender would be appropriate. For example, in the study of sexual orientation (see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-8) 5.8), researchers continue to examine the extent to which sexuality or sexual orientation—attraction to sex, gender, or some combination of both—is a biological and/or acculturative phenomenon.

**Gender Identity.** Gender identity is a component of gender that describes a person's psychological sense of their gender. Many people describe gender identity as a deeply felt, inherent sense of being a boy, a man, or male; a girl, a woman, or female; or a nonbinary gender (e.g., genderqueer, gendernonconforming, gender-neutral, agender, gender-fluid) that may or may not correspond to a person's sex assigned at birth, presumed gender based on sex assignment, or primary or secondary sex characteristics (APA, 2015a). Gender identity applies to all individuals and is not a characteristic only of transgender or gender-nonconforming individuals. Gender identity is distinct from sexual orientation (see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-8) 5.8); thus, the two must not be conflated (e.g., a gay transgender man has a masculine gender identity and a gay sexual orientation, a straight cisgender woman has a feminine gender identity and a straight sexual orientation).

**Reporting of Gender.** Authors are strongly encouraged to explicitly designate information about the gender identities of the participants making up their samples (e.g., whether participants are transgender, cisgender, or other gender identities) rather than assuming cisgender identities. Cisgender refers to individuals whose sex assigned at birth aligns with their gender identity (APA, 2015a). Cisgenderism or cissexism refers to the belief that being cisgender is normative, as indicated by the assumption that individuals are cisgender unless otherwise specified (both terms are in use). Genderism refers to the belief that there are only two genders and that gender is automatically linked to an individual's sex assigned at birth (American Psychological Association of Graduate Students, 2015).

**Transgender and Gender-Nonconforming People.** Transgender is used as an adjective to refer to persons whose gender identity, expression, and/or role does not conform to what is culturally associated with their sex assigned at birth. Some transgender people hold a binary gender, such as man or woman, but others have a gender outside of this binary, such as gender-fluid or nonbinary. Individuals whose gender varies from presumptions based on their sex assigned at birth may use terms other than "transgender" to describe their gender, including "gender-nonconforming," "genderqueer," "gendernonbinary," "gender-creative," "agender," or "two-spirit," to name a few. (Note that "two-spirit" is a term specific to Indigenous and Native American communities.) Transprejudice and transnegativity denote discriminatory attitudes toward individuals who are transgender. Diverse identity terms are used by transgender and gender-nonconforming (TGNC) people, and "TGNC" is a generally agreed-upon umbrella term. These terms are generally used in an identity-first way (e.g., "transgender people," "TGNC people"). However, there is some variation in the field; for example, clinicians often refer to individuals according to identity (self-identified) or describe gender variance, gender expansiveness, or gender diversity rather than gender nonconformity or nonbinary gender. Be sure to use identity labels that are in accordance with the stated identities of the people you are describing, and clearly define how you are using such identity labels within your writing.

**Sex Assignment.** The terms "birth sex," "natal sex," "tranny," and "transvestite" are considered disparaging by scholars in TGNC psychological research; by many individuals identifying as transgender, gendernonconforming, or nonbinary; and by people exhibiting gender diversity. Thus, these disparaging terms should be avoided. Additionally, "birth sex" and "natal sex" imply that sex is an immutable characteristic without sociocultural influence. It is more appropriate to use "assigned sex" or "sex assigned at birth," as this functionally describes the assignment of a sex term (frequently binary male or female; however, intersex is an accurate assignment for some) predicated on observation of genitalia and/or determination of chromosomes and anatomical structures of the body at birth, which necessarily is interpreted within a sociocultural context. The term "transsexual" is largely outdated, but some people identify with it; this term should be used only for an individual who specifically claims it.

**Gender and Noun Usage.** Refer to all people, including transgender people, by the name they use to refer to themselves, which may be different from their legal name or the name on their birth certificate, keeping in mind provisions for respecting confidentiality (see [Sections](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-001.xhtml#1-18) 1.18–[1.19;](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-001.xhtml#1-19) see also [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-001.xhtml#1-15) 1.15 for confidentiality in qualitative research). Likewise, to reduce the possibility of stereotypic bias and avoid ambiguity, use specific nouns to identify people or groups of people (e.g., women, men, transgender men, trans men, transgender women, trans women, cisgender women, cisgender men, gender-fluid people). Use "male" and "female" as adjectives (e.g., a male participant, a female experimenter) when appropriate and relevant. Use "male" and "female" as nouns only when the age range is broad or ambiguous or to identify a transgender person's sex assignment at birth (e.g., "person assigned female at birth" is correct, not "person assigned girl at birth"). Otherwise, avoid using "male" and "female" as nouns and instead use the specific nouns for people of different ages (e.g., women) as described in [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-3) 5.3.

To refer to all human beings, use terms like "individuals," "people," or "persons" rather than "man" or "mankind" to be accurate and inclusive. Avoid gendered endings such as "man" in occupational titles (e.g., use "police officer" instead of "policeman"), as these can be ambiguous and may imply incorrectly that all persons in the group self-identify as one gender. Instead, use a nongendered term if possible (e.g., "homemaker" instead of "housewife"). If you use sources that include the generic "man," generic "he," or dated occupational titles, clarify the historical context in which these terms were used (for more details, see the APA Style website at [https://apastyle.apa.org](https://apastyle.apa.org/)).

**Gender and Pronoun Usage.** Pronoun usage requires specificity and care on the author's part. Do not refer to the pronouns that transgender and gendernonconforming people use as "preferred pronouns" because this implies a choice about one's gender. Use the terms "identified pronouns," "selfidentified pronouns," or "pronouns" instead. When writing about a known individual, use that person's identified pronouns. Some individuals use "they" as a singular pronoun; some use alternative pronouns such as "ze," "xe," "hir," "per," "ve," "ey," and "hen" (Swedish gender-neutral pronoun), among others. Some individuals may alternate between "he" and "she" or

between "he and/or she" and "they," whereas others use no pronouns at all and use their name in place of pronouns. Refer to a transgender person using language appropriate to the person's gender, regardless of sex assigned at birth—for example, use the pronouns "he," "him," and "his" in reference to a transgender man who indicates use of these pronouns.

When referring to individuals whose identified pronouns are not known or when the gender of a generic or hypothetical person is irrelevant within the context, use the singular "they" to avoid making assumptions about an individual's gender. Use the forms "they," "them," "theirs," and so forth. Sexist bias can occur when pronouns are used carelessly, as when the pronoun "he" is used to refer to all people, when a gendered pronoun is used exclusively to define roles by sex (e.g., "the nurse . . . she"), or when "he" and "she" are alternated as though these terms are generic. Pronouns associated with a specific gender have been found to induce readers to think of individuals of that gender even when the pronoun use is intended to be generic (Gastil, 1990; Moulton et al., 1978). In addition, exposure to genderspecific language in a professional context has been linked with a lower sense of belonging, reduced motivation, and professional disidentification for individuals who do not identify with that gender (Stout & Dasgupta, 2011). When writers use the singular "they," it reduces bias in the way that readers perceive the individuals referred to in the text and thereby helps ensure that readers do not feel ostracized by that text.

Avoid using combinations such as "he or she," "she or he," "he/she," and "(s)he" as alternatives to the singular "they" because such constructions imply an exclusively binary nature of gender and exclude individuals who do not use these pronouns. These forms can also appear awkward and distracting, especially with repetition. However, the combinations "he or she" or "she or he" (but not the combinations with slashes or parentheses) can be used sparingly if all people being referred to by the pronouns use these terms. For further guidance on and examples of how to use the singular "they," see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-004.xhtml#4-18) 4.18.

**Terms That Imply Binaries.** Avoid referring to one sex or gender as the "opposite sex" or "opposite gender"; appropriate wording may be "another sex" or "another gender." The word "opposite" implies strong differences between two sexes or genders; however, there are more similarities than

differences among people of different genders or sexes (see, e.g., Zell et al., 2015). As noted previously, some individuals do not identify with either binary gender, and these phrases ignore the existence of individuals who have disorders or differences of sex development or who are intersex (for more information, see Accord Alliance, n.d.; APA, 2015a; Blackless et al., 2000; Intersex Society of North America, n.d.). To describe members of a relationship (e.g., romantic couples, people in polyamorous relationships), use the phrases "mixed gender" or "mixed sex" when the partners have different genders or sexes, rather than "opposite gender" or "opposite sex"; use the phrases "same gender" or "same sex" when the partners have the same gender or sex.

### **5.6 Participation in Research**

People participate in research in a variety of settings, including laboratories, homes, schools, businesses, clinics, and hospitals. Specific terms are used in certain contexts. When writing about people who participate in research, descriptive terms such as "college students," "children," or "respondents" as well as the more general terms "participants" and "subjects" are acceptable. "Subjects" and "sample" are also customary when discussing established statistical terms and experimental designs (e.g., "within-subjects design," "between-subjects design," "sample-size-adjusted Bayesian information criterion," "between-samples estimate of the variance").

Use the term "patient" to describe an individual diagnosed with a mental health, behavioral health, and/or medical disease, disorder, or problem who is receiving services from a health care provider (e.g., psychologist, physician, nurse, or other provider). This language is consistent with the language used in the health care system and promotes psychologists as being perceived a part of, and consistently integrated into, the culture of interprofessional, integrated health care. However, in academic, business, school, or other settings, the term "client" (or some other term) might be preferred instead of "patient." Within all contexts, respect the individual and/or cultural preferences expressed by recipients of psychological services and their families when you choose language to describe those individuals, families, or populations. (For further information, see Resolution for the Use of the Term Patient; APA, 2018.)

It is also important to recognize the difference between a case, which is an occurrence of a disorder or illness, and a person who is affected by the disorder or illness and is receiving care from a health care professional. For instance, "manic–depressive cases were treated" is problematic; revising the sentence to read "the people with bipolar disorder were treated" differentiates the people from the disorder. Likewise, in the medical context, avoid the terms "patient management" and "patient placement"; in most cases, the treatment, not the patient, is managed; some alternatives are "coordination of care," "supportive services," and "assistance."

Broad clinical terms such as "borderline" and "at risk" should be properly explained when used. Avoid using these terms in a broad sense (e.g., "the diagnosis was borderline," "at-risk students") because such usage obscures the specific clinical or psychometric meaning of the terms. For example, "the diagnosis was borderline" in a neuropsychology and psychometric testing context may be clarified to specify a score on a specific test or instrument (e.g., "standard scores between 70 and 80 are considered psychometrically borderline, or between the low average and mildly impaired ranges, indicating a risk for a diagnosis of X"), whereas in a diagnostic context, "the diagnosis was borderline" may be clarified to specify a diagnosis (e.g., borderline personality disorder). When using the term "at risk," specify who is at risk and the nature of that risk (e.g., "adolescents who use substances are at risk for early school dropout").

Across contexts, write about the people who participated in your work in a way that acknowledges their contributions and agency. Sentence structure plays a key role in this acknowledgment, as does using professional language (see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-004.xhtml#4-7) 4.7). Use the active voice to describe your actions and the actions of participants (see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-004.xhtml#4-13) 4.13); the passive voice suggests individuals are acted upon instead of being actors (e.g., "the subjects completed the trial" and "we collected data from the participants" are preferable to "the trial was completed by the subjects" and "the participants were run"). Avoid the term "failed," as in "eight participants failed to complete the Rorschach test," because it can imply a personal shortcoming instead of a research result; "did not complete" is a more neutral choice (Knatterud, 1991). These choices will help ensure that you convey respect for the people about whom you are writing.

### **5.7 Racial and Ethnic Identity**

Terms used to refer to racial and ethnic groups continue to change over time. One reason for this is simply personal preference; preferred designations are as varied as the people they name. Another reason is that designations can become dated over time and may hold negative connotations. When describing racial and ethnic groups, be appropriately specific and sensitive to issues of labeling (see [Sections](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-1) 5.1–[5.2](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-2)).

Race refers to physical differences that groups and cultures consider socially significant. For example, people might identify their race as Aboriginal, African American or Black, Asian, European American or White, Native American, Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, Māori, or some other race. Ethnicity refers to shared cultural characteristics such as language, ancestry, practices, and beliefs. For example, people might identify as Latino or another ethnicity. Be clear about whether you are referring to a racial group or to an ethnic group. Race is a social construct that is not universal, so one must be careful not to impose racial labels on ethnic groups. Whenever possible, use the racial and/or ethnic terms that your participants themselves use. Be sure that the racial and ethnic categories you use are as clear and specific as possible. For example, instead of categorizing participants as Asian American or Hispanic American, you could use more specific labels that identify their nation or region of origin, such as Japanese American or Cuban American. Use commonly accepted designations (e.g., census categories) while being sensitive to participants' preferred designation.

**Spelling and Capitalization of Racial and Ethnic Terms.** Racial and ethnic groups are designated by proper nouns and are capitalized. Therefore, use "Black" and "White" instead of "black" and "white" (do not use colors to refer to other human groups; doing so is considered pejorative). Likewise, capitalize terms such as "Native American," "Hispanic," and so on. Capitalize "Indigenous" and "Aboriginal" whenever they are used. Capitalize "Indigenous People" or "Aboriginal People" when referring to a specific group (e.g., the Indigenous Peoples of Canada), but use lowercase for "people" when describing persons who are Indigenous or Aboriginal (e.g., "the authors were all Indigenous people but belonged to different nations").

Do not use hyphens in multiword names, even if the names act as unit modifiers (e.g., write "Asian American participants," not "Asian-American participants"). If people belong to multiple racial or ethnic groups, the names of the specific groups are capitalized, but the terms "multiracial," "biracial," "multi-ethnic," and so on are lowercase.

**Terms for Specific Groups.** Designations for specific ethnic and racial groups are described next. These groups frequently are included in studies published in APA journals; the examples provided are far from exhaustive but illustrate some of the complexities of labeling.

People of African Origin. When writing about people of African ancestry, several factors inform the appropriate terms to use. People of African descent have widely varied cultural backgrounds, family histories, and family experiences. Some will be from Caribbean islands, Latin America, various regions in the United States, countries in Africa, or elsewhere. Some American people of African ancestry prefer "Black," and others prefer "African American"; both terms are acceptable. However, "African American" should not be used as an umbrella term for people of African ancestry worldwide because it obscures other ethnicities or national origins, such as Nigerian, Kenyan, Jamaican, or Bahamian; in these cases use "Black." The terms "Negro" and "Afro-American" are outdated; therefore, their use is generally inappropriate.

People of Asian Origin. When writing about people of Asian ancestry from Asia, the term "Asian" is appropriate; for people of Asian descent from the United States or Canada, the appropriate term is "Asian American" or "Asian Canadian," respectively. It is problematic to group "Asian" and "Asian American" as if they are synonymous. This usage reinforces the idea that Asian Americans are perpetual foreigners. "Asian" refers to Asians in Asia, not in the United States, and should not be used to refer to Asian Americans. The older term "Oriental" is primarily used to refer to cultural objects such as carpets and is pejorative when used to refer to people. To provide more specificity, "Asian origin" may be divided regionally, for example, into South Asia (including most of India and countries such as Afghanistan, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Nepal), Southeast Asia (including the eastern parts of India and countries such as Vietnam, Cambodia, Thailand, Indonesia, and the

Philippines), and East Asia (including countries such as China, Vietnam, Japan, South Korea and North Korea, and Taiwan). The corresponding terms (e.g., East Asian) can be used; however, refer to the specific nation or region of origin when possible.

People of European Origin. When writing about people of European ancestry, the terms "White" and "European American" are acceptable. Adjust the latter term as needed for location, for example, "European," "European American," and "European Australian" for people of European descent living in Europe, the United States, and Australia, respectively. The use of the term "Caucasian" as an alternative to "White" or "European" is discouraged because it originated as a way of classifying White people as a race to be favorably compared with other races. As with all discussions of race and ethnicity, it is preferable to be more specific about regional (e.g., Southern European, Scandinavian) or national (e.g., Italian, Irish, Swedish, French, Polish) origin when possible.

Indigenous Peoples Around the World. When writing about Indigenous Peoples, use the names that they call themselves. In general, refer to an Indigenous group as a "people" or "nation" rather than as a "tribe."

- In North America, the collective terms "Native American" and "Native North American" are acceptable (and may be preferred to "American Indian"). "Indian" usually refers to people from India. Specify the nation or people if possible (e.g., Cherokee, Navajo, Sioux).
- Hawaiian Natives may identify as "Native American," "Hawaiian Native," "Indigenous Peoples of the Hawaiian Islands," and/or "Pacific Islander."
- In Canada, refer to the Indigenous Peoples collectively as "Indigenous Peoples" or "Aboriginal Peoples" (International Journal of Indigenous Health, n.d.); specify the nation or people if possible (e.g., People of the First Nations of Canada, People of the First Nations, or First Nations People; Métis; Inuit).
- In Alaska, the Indigenous People may identify as "Alaska Natives." The Indigenous Peoples in Alaska, Canada, Siberia, and Greenland may identify as a specific nation (e.g., Inuit, Iñupiat). Avoid the term "Eskimo"

because it may be considered pejorative.

- In Latin America and the Caribbean, refer to the Indigenous Peoples collectively as "Indigenous Peoples" and by name if possible (e.g., Quechua, Aymara, Taíno, Nahuatl).
- In Australia, the Indigenous Peoples may identify as "Aboriginal People" or "Aboriginal Australians" and "Torres Strait Islander People" or "Torres Strait Island Australians." Refer to specific groups when people use these terms to refer to themselves (e.g., Anangu Pitjantjatjara, Arrernte).
- In New Zealand, the Indigenous People may identify as "Māori" or the "Māori people" (the proper spelling includes the diacritical macron over the "a").

For information on citing the Traditional Knowledge or Oral Traditions of Indigenous Peoples as well as the capitalization of terms related to Indigenous Peoples, see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-008.xhtml#8-9) 8.9.

People of Middle Eastern Origin. When writing about people of Middle Eastern and North African (MENA) descent, state the nation of origin (e.g., Iran, Iraq, Egypt, Lebanon, Israel) when possible. In some cases, people of MENA descent who claim Arab ancestry and reside in the United States may be referred to as "Arab Americans." In all cases, it is best to allow individuals to self-identify.

People of Hispanic or Latinx Ethnicity. When writing about people who identify as Hispanic, Latino (or Latinx, etc.), Chicano, or another related designation, authors should consult with their participants to determine the appropriate choice. Note that "Hispanic" is not necessarily an allencompassing term, and the labels "Hispanic" and "Latino" have different connotations. The term "Latino" (and its related forms) might be preferred by those originating from Latin America, including Brazil. Some use the word "Hispanic" to refer to those who speak Spanish; however, not every group in Latin America speaks Spanish (e.g., in Brazil, the official language is Portuguese). The word "Latino" is gendered (i.e., "Latino" is masculine and "Latina" is feminine); the use of the word "Latin@" to mean both Latino and Latina is now widely accepted. "Latinx" can also be used as a gender-neutral or nonbinary term inclusive of all genders. There are compelling reasons to

use any of the terms "Latino," "Latina," "Latino/a," "Latin@," and/or "Latinx" (see de Onís, 2017), and various groups advocate for the use of different forms.

Use the term(s) your participants or population uses; if you are not working directly with this population but it is a focus of your research, it may be helpful to explain why you chose the term you used or to choose a more inclusive term like "Latinx." In general, naming a nation or region of origin is preferred (e.g., Bolivian, Salvadoran, or Costa Rican is more specific than Latino, Latinx, Latin American, or Hispanic).

**Parallel Comparisons Among Groups.** Nonparallel designations (e.g., "African Americans and Whites," "Asian Americans and Black Americans") should be avoided because one group is described by color, whereas the other group is not. Instead, use "Blacks and Whites" or "African Americans and European Americans" for the former example and "Asian Americans and African Americans" for the latter example. Do not use the phrase "White Americans and racial minorities"; the rich diversity within racial minorities is minimized when it is compared with the term "White Americans."

**Avoiding Essentialism.** Language that essentializes or reifies race is strongly discouraged and is generally considered inappropriate. For example, phrases such as "the Black race" and "the White race" are essentialist in nature, portray human groups monolithically, and often perpetuate stereotypes.

**Writing About "Minorities."** To refer to non-White racial and ethnic groups collectively, use terms such as "people of color" or "underrepresented groups" rather than "minorities." The use of "minority" may be viewed pejoratively because it is usually equated with being less than, oppressed, or deficient in comparison with the majority (i.e., White people). Rather, a minority group is a population subgroup with ethnic, racial, social, religious, or other characteristics different from those of the majority of the population, though the relevance of this term is changing as the demographics of the population change (APA, 2015a). If a distinction is needed between the dominant racial group and nondominant racial groups, use a modifier (e.g., "ethnic," "racial") when using the word "minority" (e.g., ethnic minority,

racial minority, racial-ethnic minority). When possible, use the specific name of the group or groups to which you are referring.

Do not assume that members of minority groups are underprivileged; underprivileged means having less money, education, resources, and so forth than the other people in a society and may refer to individuals or subgroups in any racial or ethnic group. Terms such as "economically marginalized" and "economically exploited" may also be used rather than "underprivileged." Whenever possible, use more specific terms (e.g., schools with majority Black populations that are underfunded) or refer to discrimination or systematic oppression as a whole.

### **5.8 Sexual Orientation**

Sexual orientation is a part of individual identity that includes "a person's sexual and emotional attraction to another person and the behavior and/or social affiliation that may result from this attraction" (APA, 2015a, p. 862). Use the term "sexual orientation" rather than "sexual preference," "sexual identity," or "sexual orientation identity." All people choose their partners regardless of their sexual orientation; however, the orientation itself is not a choice.

Sexual orientation can be conceptualized first by the degree to which a person feels sexual and emotional attraction; some parallel terms are "sexual," "demisexual" (or "gray-asexual" or "gray-A"), and "asexual" (see The Asexual Visibility & Education Network, n.d.). A person who identifies as sexual feels sexual and emotional attraction toward some or all types of people, a person who identifies as demisexual feels sexually attracted only within the context of a strong emotional connection with another person, and a person who identifies as asexual does not experience sexual attraction or has little interest in sexual behavior (see APA, 2015b).

Second, sexual orientation can be conceptualized as having a direction. For people who identify as sexual or demisexual, their attraction then may be directed toward people who are similarly gendered, differently gendered, and so on. That is, sexual orientation indicates the gendered directionality of attraction, even if that directionality is very inclusive (e.g., nonbinary). Thus, a person might be attracted to men, women, both, neither, masculinity, femininity, and/or to people who have other gender identities such as

genderqueer or androgynous, or a person may have an attraction that is not predicated on a perceived or known gender identity.

**Terms for Sexual Orientation.** Some examples of sexual orientation are lesbian, gay, heterosexual, straight, asexual, bisexual, queer, polysexual, and pansexual (also called multisexual and omnisexual). For example, a person who identifies as lesbian might describe herself as a woman (gender identity) who is attracted to women (sexual orientation)—the sexual orientation label of "lesbian" is predicated on a perceived or known gender identity of the other person. However, someone who identifies as pansexual might describe their attraction to people as being inclusive of gender identity but not determined or delineated by gender identity. Note that these definitions are evolving and that self-identification is best when possible.

Use the umbrella term "sexual and gender minorities" to refer to multiple sexual and/or gender minority groups, or write about "sexual orientation and gender diversity" (these terms are used by the Office on Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity at APA and the Sexual & Gender Minority Research Office at the National Institutes of Health). Abbreviations such as LGBTQ, LGBTQ+, LGBTQIA, and LGBTQIA+ may also be used to refer to multiple groups. The form "LGBT" is considered outdated, but there is not consensus about which abbreviation including or beyond LGBTQ to use. If you use the abbreviation LGBTQ (or a related one), define it (see [Section](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-006.xhtml#6-25) 6.25) and ensure that it is representative of the groups about which you are writing. Be specific about the groups to which you refer (e.g., do not use LGBTQ and related abbreviations to write about legislation that primarily affects transgender people; instead, specify the impacted group). However, if in doubt, use one of the umbrella terms rather than a potentially inaccurate abbreviation.

When using specific terms for orientations, define them if there is ambiguity. For example, the adjective "gay" can be interpreted broadly, to include all genders, or more narrowly, to include only men, so define "gay" when you use it in your paper, or use the phrase "gay men" to clarify the usage. By convention, the term "lesbians" is appropriate to use interchangeably with "lesbian women," but "gay men" or "gay people" should be used, not "gays."

**Inaccurate or Pejorative Terms.** Avoid the terms "homosexual" and "homosexuality." Instead, use specific, identity-first terms to describe people's sexual orientation (e.g., bisexual people, queer people). These specific terms refer primarily to identities and to the culture and communities that have developed among people who share those identities. It is inaccurate to collapse these communities into the term "homosexual." Furthermore, the term "homosexuality" has been and continues to be associated with negative stereotypes, pathology, and the reduction of people's identities to their sexual behavior. Homoprejudice, biprejudice, homonegativity, and so forth are terms used to denote prejudicial and discriminatory attitudes toward lesbians, gay men, bisexual individuals, or other sexual minorities. Heterosexism refers to the belief that heterosexuality is normative, as indicated in the assumption that individuals are heterosexual unless otherwise specified (American Psychological Association of Graduate Students, 2015). The terms "straight" and "heterosexual" are both acceptable to use when referring to people who are attracted to individuals of another gender; the term "straight" may help move the lexicon away from a dichotomy of heterosexual and homosexual. For more information regarding sexual orientation, see "Guidelines for Psychological Practice With Transgender and Gender Nonconforming People" (APA, 2015a).

### **5.9 Socioeconomic Status**

Socioeconomic status (SES) encompasses not only income but also educational attainment, occupational prestige, and subjective perceptions of social status and social class. SES encompasses quality of life attributes and opportunities afforded to people within society and is a consistent predictor of a vast array of psychological outcomes. Thus, SES should be reported as part of the description of participants in the Method section. Because SES is complex, it is not indexed similarly in all studies; therefore, precise terminology that appropriately describes a level of specificity and sensitivity is essential to minimize bias in language around SES (for a discussion, see Diemer et al., 2013).

**Reporting SES.** When reporting SES, provide as much detailed information as possible about people's income, education, and occupations or

employment circumstances. For example, when referring to "low-income participants" or "high-income participants," classify whether reported incomes take into account household size, or provide information about the relation between household incomes and federal poverty guidelines. Additionally, SES can be described by providing information related to specific contextual and environmental conditions such as participants' housing arrangement (e.g., renting a home, owning a home, residing in subsidized housing) and neighborhood characteristics such as median household income, percentage of unemployed people, or proportion of students who qualify for free or reduced-price lunch in local schools.

**Pejorative or Stereotyping Terms.** Avoid using broad, pejorative, and generalizing terms to discuss SES. Specifically, negative connotations are associated with terms such as "the homeless," "inner-city," "ghetto," "the projects," "poverty stricken," and "welfare reliant." Instead, use specific, person-first language such as "mothers who receive TANF benefits" rather than "welfare mothers" ("TANF" stands for "Temporary Assistance for Needy Families" and is the proper term for the current welfare program in the United States). When discussing people without a fixed, regular, or adequate nighttime residence, use specific language that addresses the quality or lack of housing or length of time without housing, not whether the people consider their residence a home. That is, use language like "people experiencing homelessness," "people who are homeless," "people in emergency shelter," or "people in transitional housing," rather than calling people "the homeless."

It is important to note that SES terms such as "low income" and "poor" have historically served as implicit descriptors for racial and/or ethnic minority people. Thus, it is critical that authors include racial and/or ethnic descriptors within SES categories—for example, "This sample includes lowincome and middle-income Puerto Rican fathers." Implicit biases around economic and occupational status can result in deficit-based language that blames individuals for their occupational, educational, or economic situation (e.g., "attendant economic deficits") rather than recognizing a broader societal context that influences individual circumstances. Deficit-based language also focuses on what people lack rather than on what they possess. Instead of labeling people as "high school dropouts," "being poorly educated," or "having little education," provide more sensitive and specific

descriptors such as "people who do not have a high school diploma or equivalent." Alternatively, by adopting a strengths-based perspective, authors can write about "people who have a grade school education." Likewise, instead of writing about an "achievement gap," write about an "opportunity gap" to emphasize how the context in which people live affects their outcomes or opportunities.

### **5.10 Intersectionality**

When authors write about personal characteristics, they should be sensitive to intersectionality—that is, to the way in which individuals are shaped by and identify with a vast array of cultural, structural, sociobiological, economic, and social contexts (Howard & Renfrow, 2014). Intersectionality is a paradigm that addresses the multiple dimensions of identity and social systems as they intersect with one another and relate to inequality, such as racism, genderism, heterosexism, ageism, and classism, among other variables (APA, 2017b). Thus, individuals are located within a range of social groups whose structural inequalities can result in marginalized identities.

Because people are unique, many identities are possible. As one example of a group with an intersectional identity, Black lesbian women may have similarities to and differences from other oppressed groups in the meanings that are assigned to their multiple positionalities. Black women may identify with the oppressive and discriminatory experiences of White women as well as with those of Black men. At the same time, Black lesbian women's experiences may not be equivalent to those of these other groups. They may experience discrimination as a response to their race, gender, and/or sexual orientation. Thus, their experience does not necessarily reflect the sum of oppressions of racism, sexism, and heteronormativity (i.e., race + sex + heterosexism) but rather their unique identities and social locations as Black lesbian women that are not based in or driven by the perspectives of White women or of Black men (Bowleg, 2008; Crenshaw, 1989). That is, for example, even though Black women and White women are both women, and Black women and Black men are both Black, this does not mean that the perspectives and experiences of the latter groups are the same as or related to those of Black lesbian women.

Intersectional identities also include experiences of privileged contexts that intersect with those of oppression. For example, a Laotian immigrant woman with a disability may experience a sense of safety and privilege because of her legal immigration status in the United States, but she may experience discrimination and a lack of access to appropriate resources within and outside of her family and ethnic community on the basis of her disability status. A Jewish American adolescent may experience privilege as a result of being perceived as White but may be the target of anti-Semitic slurs at school and in social media because of their religious beliefs. These examples illustrate how perspectives are shaped by the multiplicity of identities and contexts to which an individual belongs, some oppressed and some privileged. Aspects of identity such as race, gender, and class can be oppressed or privileged, in ways that may differ across contexts, and can result in differing experiences that interact dynamically to shape an individual's experiences, advantages, and disadvantages across time and space. The intersections of multiple identities transform the oppressed and privileged aspects of each person's layered, interlocking identities.

To address intersectionality in a paper, identify individuals' relevant characteristics and group memberships (e.g., ability and/or disability status, age, gender, gender identity, generation, historical as well as ongoing experiences of marginalization, immigrant status, language, national origin, race and/or ethnicity, religion or spirituality, sexual orientation, social class, and socioeconomic status, among other variables), and describe how their characteristics and group memberships intersect in ways that are relevant to the study. Report participant data for each group using specific terms as described in [Sections](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-3) 5.3 to [5.9.](https://jigsaw.vaultebooks.com/books/9781433832185/epub/OEBPS/html/9781433832154-005.xhtml#5-9) For example, when describing participants in terms of their race and gender, write "20 participants were African American women, 15 participants were European American women, 23 participants were African American men, and 18 participants were European American men (all participants were cisgender)" rather than "35 participants were women and 41 were men; 43 were African American and 33 were European American." Reporting participant characteristics in this way helps readers understand how many groups there are that are composed of individuals with the same characteristics. Likewise, when reporting and interpreting the results, note the impact of any intersections on the findings rather than assuming that one characteristic is responsible for what you found. For more

discussion of intersectionality, see the Multicultural Guidelines: An Ecological Approach to Context, Identity, and Intersectionality (APA, 2017b).

